>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 22: THE
PRESIDENT CLEARS THE WAY FOR
AMERICAN TROOPS TO FIGHT IN
AFGHANISTAN BEYOND THE END OF
2014.
A REPUBLICAN-LED CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEE SAYS THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION WAS NOT GUILTY OF
WRONGDOING IN BENGHAZI.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TRIBAL JUSTICE: SEARCHING FOR
WAYS TO PUNISH NON-NATIVE
AMERICANS WHO COMMIT DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE ON RESERVATIONS.
>> THE CONFUSED JURISDICTION IN
INDIAN COUNTRY CREATES THIS
PLACE WHERE YOU HAVE A CATEGORY
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE ESSENTIALLY
ABOVE THE LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN A MAJOR UNANNOUNCED POLICY
SHIFT, AMERICAN TROOPS SERVING
IN AFGHANISTAN BEYOND THE END OF
THIS YEAR WILL BE ALLOWED TO
ENGAGE IN COMBAT AGAINST THE
TALIBAN.
THIS FROM THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
WHICH SAYS THE NEW POLICY ALSO
AUTHORIZES THE USE OF AMERICAN
JETS, BOMBERS AND DRONES TO
SUPPORT AFGHAN TROOPS ON THEIR
COMBAT MISSIONS.
LAST MAY, THE PRESIDENT HAD SAID
THE REMAINING 10,000 AMERICAN
TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN WOULD BE
LIMITED TO TRAINING AFGHAN
FORCES AND HUNTING THE REMNANTS
OF AL QAEDA.
THE PRESIDENT’S CHANGE OF HEART
CAME AT A TIME WHEN THE
ADMINISTRATION WAS BEING
CRITICIZED FOR ITS DECISION NOT
TO LEAVE TROOPS BEHIND IN IRAQ.
THE UNITED STATES IS PRESSING
ITS CAMPAIGN AGAINST ISIS
EXTREMISTS IN IRAQ.
ACCORDING TO THE U.S. CENTRAL
COMMAND, 23 AIRSTRIKES HAVE BEEN
LAUNCHED AGAINST ISIS SINCE
WEDNESDAY.
ANOTHER SEVEN ISIS POSITIONS
WERE TARGETED IN SYRIA.
THIS AS THE IRAQI ARMY HAS
LAUNCHED A COUNTEROFFENSIVE
AGAINST THE MILITANTS IN ANBAR
PROVINCE, WEST OF BAGHDAD.
DURING THEIR ADVANCE, IRAQI
TROOPS DISCOVERED THE BODIES OF
DOZENS OF TRIBESMEN APPARENTLY
KILLED FOR RESISTING THE
MILITANTS.
EXTREMISTS IN EAST AFRICA ARE
SAID TO BE BEHIND A MASS KILLING
THERE TODAY.
AUTHORITIES SAY AL SHABAB
MILITANTS HIJACKED A BUS, THEN
MURDERED ALL THE NON-MUSLIMS ON
BOARD.
AT LEAST 28 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
THE DEADLINE FOR A NUCLEAR DEAL
BETWEEN IRAN AND THE WESTERN
POWERS, INCLUDING THE UNITED
STATES, IS MONDAY, AND TALKS
BETWEEN THE TWO SIDES CONTINUED
TODAY IN VIENNA.
THIS IS HOW SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY ASSESSED THE STATE OF
THE NEGOTIATIONS.
>> WE’VE BEEN OBVIOUSLY HAVING
DIFFICULT TALKS HERE ON A
COMPLICATED TOPIC.
WE ARE WORKING HARD.
WE HOPE WE ARE MAKING CAREFUL
PROGRESS, BUT WE HAVE BIG GAPS.
WE STILL HAVE SOME SERIOUS GAPS
WHICH WE ARE WORKING TO CLOSE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE IRANIAN
FOREIGN MINISTER, MOHAMMAD JAVID
ZARIF, TOLD REPORTERS HE
BELIEVES THERE WILL BE A DEAL.
IN EUROPE TODAY, DUTCH
AUTHORITIES KILLED SEVERAL
THOUSAND DUCKS IN AN EFFORT TO
CONTAIN AN OUTBREAK OF THE BIRD
FLU.
MORE THAN 200,000 BIRDS HAVE
BEEN KILLED IN THE PAST WEEK.
BUT TODAY, GERMAN AUTHORITIES
CONFIRMED A SECOND CASE OF BIRD
FLU THERE.
THE WORLD ORGANIZATION FOR
ANIMAL HEALTH SAID TODAY THE
LATEST BIRD VIRUS IN EUROPE IS
SIMILAR TO ONE THAT DEVASTATED
POULTRY FLOCKS IN SOUTH KOREA
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
APPARENTLY STEPPING UP ITS
EFFORTS TO SHUT DOWN THE PRISON
AT GUANTANAMO BAY IN CUBA.
AUTHORITIES SAY SEVEN DETAINEES
HAVE BEEN SET FREE THIS MONTH.
THE LATEST: A SAUDI MAN
SUSPECTED OF FIGHTING FOR AL
QAEDA IN AFGHANISTAN.
HE HAD BEEN HELD FOR 12 YEARS
BUT HAS NOW BEEN RETURNED TO
SAUDI ARABIA.
THERE ARE NOW ABOUT 140
PRISONERS AT GUANTANAMO.
AT ONE TIME, FOLLOWING 9/11, THE
PRISON HELD MORE THAN 750
SUSPECTED TERRORISTS.
MORE THAN HALF OF THOSE WHO
REMAIN ARE FROM YEMEN.
THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA TODAY
SUSPENDED ALL FRATERNITY
ACTIVITIES UNTIL JANUARY
FOLLOWING ALLEGATIONS THAT A
FEMALE STUDENT WAS GANG RAPED IN
ONE OF THE FRATERNITY HOUSES IN
2012.
THE INCIDENT CAME TO LIGHT IN AN
ARTICLE PUBLISHED EARLIER THIS
WEEK.
U.V.A. PRESIDENT TERESA SULLIVAN
SAID THE TIME BETWEEN NOW AND
JANUARY WILL BE USED TO ASSEMBLE
GROUPS OF STUDENTS AND OTHERS TO
DISCUSS HOW TO PREVENT SEXUAL
VIOLENCE ON CAMPUS.
AND NASA HAS RELEASED AN
ENHANCED IMAGE OF EUROPA, ONE OF
JUPITER’S 67 MOONS.
THE WHITE AND FAINTLY BLUE AREAS
OF THE IMAGE ARE THOUGHT TO
CONTAIN ICE, WHICH COULD MAKE IT
CONDUCIVE TO LIFE.
IN CASE YOU ARE WONDERING,
EUROPA IS ONLY 390 MILLION MILES
FROM EARTH.
>> Sreenivasan: LATE YESTERDAY,
THERE WERE NEW FINDINGS ABOUT
THE ATTACK IN BENGHAZI, LIBYA,
IN 2012 THAT LED TO THE DEATHS
OF AMBASSADOR CHRISTOPHER
STEVENS AND THREE OTHER
AMERICANS.
KEN DILANIAN OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS WROTE ABOUT IT AND JOINS
US NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
SO, KEN, WHAT WERE THE FINDINGS?
>> WELL, HARI, THIS REPORT
ESSENTIALLY DEBUNKED ALMOST
EVERY CRITICISM THAT HAD BEEN
LEVELED AT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION OVER THIS
INCIDENT.
IT BASICALLY SAID THAT THERE WAS
NO INTENT TO MISLEAD THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC ABOUT IT, THAT
THE C.I.A. AND THE MILITARY
ACTED APPROPRIATELY, AND THAT
MANY OF THE CONSPIRACY THEORIES
THAT HAVE BEEN OUT THERE ABOUT
COVER-UPS AND DARK FORCES AT
WORK WERE NOT ACCURATE.
AND PRINCIPALLY, THE MOST
INTERESTING FINDING FOR ME IS
THAT AFTER THE-- THE WEEKEND
AFTER THE ATTACK, THE
THEN-AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED
NATIONS, SUSAN RICE, WENT ON THE
SUNDAY SHOWS, MANY VIEWERS MAY
REMEMBER, AND SAID THAT THE
ATTACK HAD EVOLVED FROM A
PEACEFUL PROTEST.
THAT TURNED OUT TO BE WRONG, AND
SHE AND THE ADMINISTRATION TOOK
A LOT OF FLAK AS A RESULT OF
THAT ERROR.
THIS REPORT BY THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE, WHICH
IS A REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED
COMMITTEE, ESSENTIALLY SAYS
THAT RICE WAS RELYING ON
INTELLIGENCE THAT WAS PROVIDED
TO HER FROM THE C.I.A. AND OTHER
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES, AND IN
FACT, POINTS OUT THAT THERE WERE
21 INTELLIGENCE REPORTS THAT
SAID THAT THERE HAD BEEN A
PROTEST AT THIS DIPLOMATIC
FACILITY.
THOSE TURNED OUT TO BE WRONG,
BUT THE INTELLIGENCE PICTURE WAS
INCREDIBLY CONFUSED.
AND SO THE REPORT FOUND THAT
THERE WAS NO INTENT TO
MISLEAD BY ANYBODY IN THE
GOVERNMENT ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED
HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, SO WHAT
MAKES THIS PARTICULAR COMMITTEE
OR THIS PARTICULAR FINDING
DIFFERENT?
THERE HAVE BEEN PREVIOUS
INVESTIGATIONS, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, THIS IS THE SEVENTH
CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION, I
BELIEVE, AND THE EIGHTH OVERALL.
AND THIS, ESSENTIALLY, MIRRORED
SOME OF THE FINDINGS OF THE
OTHER INVESTIGATIONS,
PARTICULARLY ON THE ROLE OF THE
MILITARY.
BUT THIS ONE-- THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE HAS
ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED
INTELLIGENCE AND C.I.A.
PERSONNEL THAT OTHER COMMITTEES
DON’T HAVE, SO THIS REPORT GOT
THE DEEPEST INTO WHAT THE
INTELLIGENCE SAID, YOU KNOW, WHO
CARRIED OUT THE ATTACK, WHAT
THEIR MOTIVATIONS WERE.
AND IN FACT, IT POINTED OUT
THAT TO THIS DAY THAT’S NOT
COMPLETELY CLEAR.
WHAT WAS ALSO SIGNIFICANT
ABOUT THIS IS THAT IT’S A
REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED COMMITTEE.
THE CHAIRMAN IS MIKE ROGERS,
OUTGOING RETIRING MEMBER FROM
MICHIGAN.
A VERY PARTISAN REPUBLICAN,
BUT HE CONCLUDED AND HIS
COLLEAGUES CONCLUDED THAT MANY
OF THE CHARGES AGAINST THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION WHICH HAVE BEEN
LEVELED BY REPUBLICANS-- THIS
HAS BEEN A BIG POLITICAL ISSUE--
MANY OF THOSE CHARGES JUST
SIMPLY DON’T HOLD UP.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, SO WHAT
ARE THE REPERCUSSIONS NOW?
DOES THIS CHANGE... I THINK
THERE’S ONE MORE COMMITTEE THAT
COULD HAVE FINDINGS?
>> WELL, THERE IS A SELECT
COMMITTEE THAT IS SUPPOSED TO
CONTINUE AN INVESTIGATION INTO
THIS ISSUE.
AND THEY HAVE SAID THEY WILL
TAKE THIS LATEST FINDING INTO
ACCOUNT, BUT SOME OF THE KEY
REPUBLICANS ON THAT COMMITTEE
HAVE COME OUT AND SAID, LOOK,
THIS HOUSE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE REPORT DEBUNKS A LOT
OF THE QUESTIONS YOU GUYS HAVE
BEEN RAISING SO LET’S FOCUS ON
WHAT WE ALL AGREE WAS A
SHORTCOMING IN THIS INCIDENT,
WHICH IS THAT FACILITY WAS NOT
WELL PROTECTED; THE STATE
DEPARTMENT PART OF THE FACILITY,
IN PARTICULAR, WAS NOT WELL
PROTECTED.
THE PEOPLE GUARDING IT KNEW
THAT, AND THEY HAD ASKED FOR
MORE... BETTER SECURITY FROM
WASHINGTON, AND THAT WAS NOT
GRANTED.
EVERYONE AGREES THAT THAT WAS
A SHORTCOMING, AND THE HOPE IS
THAT THIS-- AT LEAST AMONG
DEMOCRATS -- THAT THIS
COMMITTEE CAN FOCUS ON THAT
SHORTCOMING AND RECTIFYING IT
AND BETTER PROTECTING
DIPLOMATIC FACILITIES AROUND
THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: ANY IDEA HOW
MANY DOLLARS ALL THESE
INVESTIGATIONS COST?
>> YOU KNOW, I DON’T KNOW,
BUT IT’S GOT TO BE TENS OF
MILLIONS.
THERE’S DOCUMENT GATHERING THAT
TAKES PLACE.
IN THIS PROBE ALONE, THERE
WERE 20 HEARINGS OR EVENTS
BY THE HOUSE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, AND THEY TALKED TO
DOZENS OF PEOPLE AND REVIEWED
THOUSANDS OF DOCUMENTS.
IT HAS BEEN AN ENORMOUS
UNDERTAKING.
AND WE’LL NEVER KNOW HOW MUCH
TIME EXECUTIVE BRANCH PERSONNEL
HAVE SPENT RESPONDING TO THESE
INQUIRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, KEN
DILANIAN FROM THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE FOCUS ON THE VERY
HIGH LEVELS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
AGAINST NATIVE AMERICAN WOMEN
LIVING ON RESERVATIONS
THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES.
TWO THINGS TO KEEP IN MIND: THE
OVERWHELMING PERCENTAGE OF
ASSAILANTS ARE ACTUALLY NOT
AMERICAN INDIANS, BUT OTHERS
LIVING ON OR NEAR RESERVATIONS;
AND UNTIL RECENTLY, THE TRIBAL
COURTS THAT PRESIDE OVER THESE
RESERVATIONS HAD NO JURISDICTION
OVER NON-NATIVE PERPETRATORS.
NOW, CONGRESS HAS CHANGED THE
LAW THROUGH THE VIOLENCE AGAINST
WOMEN ACT, BUT SOME VICTIMS OF
SEXUAL CRIMES SAY THE CHANGES
DON’T GO NEARLY FAR ENOUGH, AND
OTHER CRITICS SAY THE NEW LAW IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND
UNENFORCEABLE ANYWAY.
THE NEWSHOUR’S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: AMERICAN INDIAN
LISA BRUNNER SPENT HER CHILDHOOD
ON AND AROUND THE WHITE EARTH
INDIAN RESERVATION, A HUGE TRACT
OF LAND IN NORTHERN MINNESOTA
THAT’S HOME TO AROUND 4,000
AMERICAN INDIANS.
LISA GREW UP SURROUNDED BY
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SINCE HAS
BECOME A LEADING ADVOCATE FOR
NATIVE VICTIMS OF ABUSE.
>> IT’S HAPPENING EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: NATIVE WOMEN IN THE
U.S. FACE SOME OF THE HIGHEST
LEVELS OF VIOLENCE OF ANY GROUP.
ACCORDING TO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, ONE IN THREE NATIVE
WOMEN HAS BEEN RAPED, AND THREE
OUT OF FIVE WILL EXPERIENCE
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN THEIR
LIFETIMES.
LISA SAYS SHE TOO IS A VICTIM OF
BOTH RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT.
SHE HAD ENOUGH, SHE SAYS, WHEN A
BOYFRIEND SLAPPED HER ACROSS THE
FACE WHILE SHE CRADLED HER NINE-
MONTH-OLD CHILD.
>> AND I PACKED UP AND LEFT THE
NEXT DAY, AND I NEVER WENT BACK.
AND I VOWED THEREAFTER THAT NO
MAN WILL EVER TOUCH ME AGAIN.
I WILL NOT... MY BABIES WILL NOT
KNOW THE LIFE THAT I HAD TO
SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: LISA SAYS THAT AS
AN ADULT SHE SELDOM WENT TO THE
POLICE AND THAT MUCH OF THAT HAS
TO DO WITH THE FACT THAT SOME OF
THE MEN WHO ATTACKED HER WERE
NON-NATIVE--NOTAMERICAN
INDIANS.
SO WHY DOES THAT MATTER?
UP UNTIL RECENTLY, NON-NATIVE
PEOPLE WERE IMMUNE FROM
PROSECUTION IN TRIBAL COURTS.
THAT’S IMPORTANT FOR TWO
REASONS: ONE, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAYS NON-NATIVE MEN
COMMIT THE VAST MAJORITY OF
RAPES AND ASSAULTS AGAINST
NATIVE WOMEN; AND TWO, FEDERAL
ATTORNEYS WHO ARE OFTEN THE ONLY
LAWYERS WHO CAN TRY NON-NATIVE
PEOPLE WHO COMMIT CRIMES ON
RESERVATIONS OFTEN DON’T
PROSECUTE.
>> I KNEW WHEN I HAD BEEN RAPED
AND BEEN VICTIMIZED AND WHATNOT
I NEVER TRIED TO REPORT IT
BECAUSE NOTHING... I KNEW
NOTHING WOULD EVER HAPPEN.
I KNEW NOTHING WOULD BE DONE.
>> WHEN YOU HAVE THE
COMBINATION OF THE SILENCE
THAT COMES FROM VICTIMS WHO
LIVE IN FEAR AND A LACK OF
ACCOUNTABILITY BY OUTSIDE
JURISDICTIONS TO PROSECUTE
THAT CRIME, YOU’VE CREATED,
IF YOU WILL, THE PERFECT STORM
FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL
ASSAULT, WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT
ALL THE STATISTICS WOULD SORT
OF BEAR OUT.
>> Reporter: IN A 1978 DECISION,
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT SAID
INDIAN TRIBES WITH THEIR OWN
TRIBAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS AND
COURTS WERE NOT ALLOWED TO
CHARGE NON-INDIANS UNLESS
CONGRESS PASSED A LAW, BUT
CONGRESS DIDN’T ACT FOR 35
YEARS.
THEN, JUST LAST YEAR, WHEN
LAWMAKERS WERE REAUTHORIZING THE
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT,
SOMETIMES CALLED VAWA, THEY
INCLUDED A NEW PROVISION
GRANTING TRIBAL COURTS
JURISDICTION OVER A LIMITED
NUMBER OF DOMESTIC AND DATING
VIOLENCE CRIMES COMMITTED BY
NON-INDIANS ON RESERVATIONS,
PERHAPS ALLOWING PEOPLE LIKE
LISA BRUNNER TO SEE JUSTICE.
WHILE THE TRIBAL DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE PROVISION DOESN’T KICK
IN UNTIL MARCH OF NEXT YEAR,
THREE INDIAN RESERVATIONS HAVE
TAKEN PART IN A PILOT PROGRAM
WHERE THEY CAN BEGIN SOME OF
THOSE PROSECUTIONS NOW: ONE
RESERVATION IN ARIZONA; ONE IN
OREGON; AND THIS INDIAN
RESERVATION, THE TULALIP
RESERVATION, A LITTLE MORE THAN
AN HOUR’S DRIVE NORTH OF
SEATTLE, WASHINGTON.
THERESA POULEY HAS SERVED AS
CHIEF JUDGE ON THE TULALIP
TRIBAL COURT SINCE 2009.
SHE SAYS THE RESPONSIBILITY TO
PROSECUTE OFFENDERS ON INDIAN
RESERVATIONS BELONGS TO TRIBAL
COURTS.
>> THE CONFUSED JURISDICTION IN
INDIAN COUNTRY WHICH LEAVES
THOSE RESPONSIBILITIES
OFTENTIMES TO THE STATE AND
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, WHO DON’T
EFFECTIVELY PROSECUTE THOSE
CRIMES, CREATES THIS PLACE WHERE
YOU HAVE A CATEGORY OF PEOPLE ON
INDIAN RESERVATIONS WHO ARE
ESSENTIALLY ABOVE THE LAW.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THIS
TRIBAL PROVISION IN VAWA DO TO
HELP CLOSE THAT GAP?
>> IT ALLOWS ME TO TREAT ALL
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PERPETRATORS
EXACTLY THE SAME, INDIAN OR NON-
INDIAN.
SO I HAVE AUTHORITY OVER INDIANS
WHO COMMIT THAT CRIME.
THIS JUST GIVES ME AUTHORITY
OVER NON-INDIANS WHO COMMIT THE
EXACT SAME CRIME.
>> Reporter: SINCE MARCH OF THIS
YEAR, THE TULALIP TRIBAL
PROSECUTOR HAS BROUGHT CHARGES
AGAINST FIVE ALLEGED NON-INDIAN
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE DEFENDANTS.
AS OF THIS AIRING, TWO HAVE
PLEAD GUILTY, TWO ARE AWAITING
TRIAL AND ONE CASE HAS BEEN
DISMISSED.
BUT WILL THIS NEW AUTHORITY
ACTUALLY HELP STOP THE CRISIS OF
VIOLENCE AGAINST INDIAN WOMEN?
ONE CONCERN: THE NEW LAW ONLY
COVERS DOMESTIC AND DATING
VIOLENCE; IT DOES NOT INCLUDE
CRIMES LIKE ASSAULT BY A
STRANGER OR EVEN RAPE.
MICHELLE DEMMERT IS THE TULALIP
TRIBES’ LEAD ATTORNEY.
>> UNFORTUNATELY IT’S NOT QUITE
GONE FAR ENOUGH.
IN JUST THREE RECENT CASES, WE
HAD CHILDREN INVOLVED, AND WE’RE
NOT ABLE TO CHARGE ON THE CRIMES
THAT WERE COMMITTED AGAINST
THOSE CHILDREN, INCLUDING
ENDANGERMENT, CRIMINAL
ENDANGERMENT, POSSIBLY ASSAULT,
OTHER ATTENDANT OR COLLATERAL
CRIMES.
>> Reporter: YOU’RE ABLE TO
PROSECUTE ONE CRIME BUT NOT THE
OTHER.
>> THAT’S RIGHT.
THAT’S RIGHT.
>> WHAT WE HAVE ALLOWED IS THE
AUTHORITY FOR TRIBAL COURTS TO
TRY U.S. CITIZENS IN THEIR
COURTS FOR VERY GOOD REASONS.
>> Reportrer: OKLAHOMA SENATOR
TOM COBURN WAS ONE OF THE
ORIGINAL CO-SPONSORS OF THE 1994
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT, BUT,
FROM A LEGAL PERPSECTIVE, HE
SAYS TRIBES CANNOT EXTEND THEIR
AUTHORITY TO NON-INDIANS.
>> YOU CANNOT CAST TRIBAL
SOVEREIGNTY ON ME.
I’M NOT A MEMBER OF THE TRIBE.
>> Reporter: HAILING FROM A
STATE WITH ONE OF THE HIGHEST
INDIAN POPULATIONS IN THE
COUNTRY, COBURN SAYS CONGRESS
SHOULD HAVE FORCED U.S.
ATTORNEYS, FEDERAL LAWYERS, TO
PROSECUTE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
CRIMES ON RESERVATIONS MORE
VIGOROUSLY RATHER THAN GRANTING
AUTHORITY TO TRIBAL COURTS.
AND HE FEELS THE NEW LAW FALLS
SHORT AND MAY EVEN BE OVERTURNED
IN COURT BECAUSE SOME TRIBAL
SYSTEMS MAY NOT HAVE THE
RESOURCES TO ENSURE DUE PROCESS.
>> THERE’S NO WAY YOU CAN ASSURE
AND GUARANTEE CONSTITUTIONAL
PROVISIONS UNDER WHAT PASSED.
SO IT... THIS PROVISION WILL
EVENTUALLY BE THROWN OUT, BE
CHALLENGED AND ON APPEAL THEY’LL
LOSE BECAUSE YOU CANNOT
GUARANTEE AMERICAN CITIZENS
THEIR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS IF
THEY’RE NON-TRIBAL MEMBERS IN A
TRIBAL COURT.
>> Reporter: BUT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT’S SAM HIRSCH SAYS ANY
TRIBE THAT PROCEEDS WITH
PROSECUTIONS MUST ADHERE TO A
LIST OF CONSTITUTIONAL
GUARANTEES LAID OUT IN THE NEW
LAW.
>> HERE’S THE EVIDENCE THAT IT’S
WORKING: UNDER THE PILOT
PROJECT, MORE THAN TWO DOZEN
NON-INDIANS HAVE BEEN CHARGED
WITH DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND
DATING VIOLENCE CRIMES.
THEY ALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO GO
STRAIGHT TO FEDERAL COURT AND
ASK TO BE RELEASED IF THEIR
RIGHTS ARE BEING VIOLATED.
AND HOW MANY HAVE DONE SO?
ZERO.
>> Reporter: SO FAR?
>> SO FAR.
>> Reporter: HIRSCH CONCEDES THE
LAW IS LIMITED, ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE IT ONLY COVERS DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AND NOT MORE SERIOUS
CRIMES.
BUT HE SAYS THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS STEPPING UP ITS
PROSECUTION RATE AGAINST NON-
NATIVES.
>> AT THE SAME TIME, WE HAVE TO
RECOGNIZE THAT WHEN FEDERAL
PROSECUTORS AND F.B.I. AGENTS
ARE OFTEN LOCATED HUNDREDS OF
MILES AWAY, MANY HOURS’ DRIVE
AWAY, IT’S VERY HARD FOR THEM TO
PLAY THE ROLE OF LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT, ESPECIALLY ON
MISDEMEANOR LEVEL CRIMES AND
LOWER-LEVEL FELONIES.
>> Reporter: IN THE YEARS
LEADING UP TO THE TULALIP
RESERVATION’S ABILITY TO
PROSECUTE NON-INDIANS, CHIEF
JUDGE THERESA POULEY SAYS SHE’S
ALREADY SEEN ONE MARK OF
SUCCESS.
>> THE REPORTING OF DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT
CASES HAVE GONE UP AT TULALIP
FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS
STEADILY AS VICTIMS KNOW THAT
PERPETRATORS WILL BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
AND AS THEY KNOW THEY’RE GOING
TO BE LISTENED OR HEARD, THEY
ACTUALLY REPORT IT MORE OFTEN.
SO IF YOU JUST LOOK AT THE
NUMBERS, YOU SORT OF SEE THAT IT
CHANGES THE LEVEL OF REPORTING,
AND THAT’S REALLY THE FIRST STEP
TOWARDS STOPPING IT.
>> Reporter: BACK ON THE WHITE
EARTH RESERVATION, LISA BRUNNER
IS STILL CONCERNED ABOUT THE
LIMITATIONS OF THE NEW LAW, THAT
IT DOESN’T COVER CRIMES LIKE
RAPE.
IT’S ESPECIALLY PERSONAL BECAUSE
SHE SAYS ONE OF HER DAUGHTERS
WAS RAPED A FEW YEARS AGO BY
NON-NATIVE MEN WHO CAME ON TO
THE RESERVATION.
>> OF COURSE THEY THREATENED
HER, AND SHE DIDN’T TELL ME
UNTIL AFTER THE FACT, BUT WE DID
REPORT IT TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
THAT WAS IT.
>> Reporter: NOTHING HAPPENED
AFTER THAT?
>> NO.
NOTHING.
>> Reporter: ONCE THE NEW LAW
GOES INTO FULL EFFECT NEXT YEAR,
IT’S EXPECTED THAT ONLY A FEW
DOZEN TRIBES ARE PREPARED TO
INITIALLY TAKE ON THE TASK OF
PROSECUTING NON-INDIAN
DEFENDANTS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE PAST FEW
YEARS, BLACK FRIDAY SHOPPING
SALES HAVE CREPT RIGHT INTO
THANKSGIVING DAY AS STORES TRY
TO GAIN AN ADVANTAGE OVER THEIR
COMPETITORS AT THE START OF THE
HOLIDAY SHOPPING SEASON.
BUT NOW, THERE IS BACKLASH
AGAINST THAT PRACTICE WITHIN THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY.
STEPHEN GREENHOUSE OF THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" WROTE ABOUT THIS
RECENTLY.
I SPOKE WITH HIM EARLIER.
SO HAS IT FINALLY GOTTEN TOO
FAR, THAT PEOPLE ARE ESSENTIALLY
BRINGING THEIR STAFFS IN JUST TO
TRY TO KEEP THE DOORS OPEN ON
THANKSGIVING DAY?
>> YOU KNOW, LAST YEAR, ALL
THE NEWS WAS THAT MORE AND MORE
STORES WERE OPENING ON
THANKSGIVING IN THEORY TO PLEASE
CONSUMERS, AND THEN THERE’S SUCH
A CRUSH ON BLACK FRIDAY THEY
WERE COMPETING TO MOVE THINGS UP
INTO THURSDAY.
NOW, THERE’S A BACKLASH, AS YOU
SAY, HARI, WHERE A LOT OF
RETAILERS SEE THAT A LOT OF
CONSUMERS DON’T LIKE THE IDEA OF
SHOPPING ON THANKSGIVING, AND
THEY THINK THAT WORKERS SHOULD
HAVE THE DAY OFF.
SO SOME PROMINENT RETAILERS--
COSTCO, MARSHALL, GAME STOP--
HAVE ALL KIND OF NOT JUST
ANNOUNCED BUT THEY’RE
BOASTING, "WE’RE GOING TO
REMAIN CLOSED ON THANKSGIVING.
IT SHOWS THAT WE CARE ABOUT OUR
WORKERS.
IT SHOWS WE CARE ABOUT THE
HOLIDAY.
IT SHOWS WE CARE ABOUT THEIR
FAMILIES."
THERE’S AN INTERESTING TUG-OF-
WAR NOW ABOUT WHETHER TO STAY
OPEN TO PLEASE CONSUMERS OR STAY
CLOSED KIND OF TO PLEASE WORKERS
AND IT’S, I THINK, VERY GOOD
PUBLIC RELATIONS TO REMAIN
CLOSED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, I KNOW THAT
WALMART KIND OF PUSHED BACK AND
SAID, "LOOK, WE’RE ALMOST LIKE
AIRPORTS AND GAS STATIONS, AND
WE’VE BEEN OPEN ON THANKSGIVING
FOR 20 YEARS."
>> ON ONE HAND, WALMART CAN SAY
WE’RE A SUPERMARKET, AND A LOT
OF SUPERMARKETS ARE OPEN
THANKSGIVING MORNING BECAUSE IN
CASE YOU THE NEED THE
CRANBERRIES OR CRANBERRY SAUCE,
OR GOD FORBID YOU FORGOT A
TURKEY.
THE OTHER PART OF THE WALMART IS
THE VERY COMPETITIVE RETAILER
THAT MOVED BLACK FRIDAY INTO
THURSDAY THE WAY MANY OTHER
RETAILERS HAVE, AND THAT MEANT
IT NEEDED A LOT MORE WORKERS.
THAT MEANT KIND OF PRESSURED--
INVITE A LOT OF CONSUMERS TO GET
UP FROM THEIR THANKSGIVING TABLE
AT 4:00 P.M. AND RUSH OVER TO
WALMART AND WAIT IN LINE FOR TWO
HOURS TO SHOP.
AND WALMART HAS IN WAYS SEEN
THAT’S A PROBLEM.
IT’S GOING TO REMAIN OPEN ON
THANKSGIVING, BUT IT SAW THAT
SO MANY CONSUMERS ARE UNHAPPY
ABOUT HAVING TO WAITING AN HOUR,
TWO HOURS, THREE HOURS IN LINE
ON THANKSGIVING DAY AND BLACK
FRIDAY FOR BLACK FRIDAY SALES,
IT SAYS BLACK FRIDAY IS GOING TO
MAGICALLY BECOME A FIVE-DAY
AFFAIR WHERE THE BLACK FRIDAY
SALES WILL BE SPREAD.
AND THAT MIGHT MEAN FEWER
PEOPLE WILL BE NEEDED TO WORK ON
THANKSGIVING DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS ALSO A
BIG, BIG MOMENT THAT STARTS THE
SEASON.
AND FOR RETAILERS THIS LAST
STRETCH OF THE YEAR IS
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT TO THEIR
BOTTOM LINE, RIGHT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THEY CALL IT BLACK FRIDAY
BECAUSE IN THEORY THEY’VE BEEN
RUNNING IN THE RED ALL YEAR LONG
AND ON BLACK FRIDAY’S THEY’RE
MAKING MONEY.
I HAD AN INTERESTING INTERVIEW
WITH THE HEAD P.R. GUY FOR
NORDSTROM, AND HE SAID, "WE USED
TO BE CLOSED ON JULY 4 AND NEW
YEAR’S DAY BUT OUR CONSUMERS
PUSHED US TO OPEN THOSE DAYS.
SO NOW WE’RE OPEN NEW YEAR’S DAY
AND JULY 4."
BUT HE SAID, "BUT SO FAR, OUR
CONSUMERS AND SHOPPERS AREN’T
PUSHING US TO OPEN ON
THANKSGIVING, AND IF THEY DO,
THEN EVEN WE-- GREAT,
PRESTIGIOUS NORDSTROM-- MIGHT DO
THAT AS WELL."
SO, THERE REALLY ARE A LOT OF
OF CONFLICTING PRESSURES.
A LOT OF WORKERS REALLY DON’T
WANT TO WORK THAT DAY.
AND A LOT OF CONSUMERS, IF THEY
COULD GET A GOOD BARGAIN THAT
DAY, THEY’RE HAPPY TO GO.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THERE WAS THIS
POLL DONE LAST YEAR BY THE
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT WHERE,
YOU KNOW-- MORE THAN 90% OF
SHOPPERS SAY THEY REALLY DON’T
LOVE TO GO OUT RUNNING FOR BLACK
FRIDAY SALES ON THANKSGIVING
DAY, AND JUST 7% SAID THEY’RE
HAPPY TO.
BUT MAYBE A LOT OF RETAILERS ARE
EAGER NOT TO MISS THAT 7%.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
STEVEN GREENHOUSE OF THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" JOINING US FROM
CHICAGO, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
ALWAYS NICE TO BE HERE, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: SHOULD RETAIL
STORES REMAIN OPEN ON
THANKSGIVING?
TAKE OUR POLL AND SHARE YOUR
OPINION AT newshour.pbs.org.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WE’RE FAMILIAR
WITH SOLAR POWER, WIND POWER,
EVEN TIDAL POWER AS SOURCES OF
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY TO DECREASE
OUR DEPENDENCE ON FOSSIL FUELS.
WHAT WE ARE ABOUT TO SHOW IS A
NEW PLAN TO USE ANOTHER
ALTERNATIVE AND UTTERLY RELIABLE
SOURCE OF ENERGY-- IN THIS CASE,
TO POWER BUSES IN ENGLAND.
RUPERT EVELYN OF ITN REPORTS.
>> Reporter: WE CALL IT WASTE,
BUT JUST BECAUSE IT’S BEEN
FLUSHED DOWN THE DRAIN DOES NOT
MEAN IT’S UNWANTED.
IN FACT, IT’S A FUEL, AND IN
THIS CASE, WHERE THERE’S MUCK,
THERE’S MILEAGE.
FOR THE FIRST TIME, A BUS IS
BEING POWERED BY THE METHANE
GAS GENERATED FROM THE TREATMENT
OF HUMAN AND FOOD WASTE.
ITS FUEL SOURCE IS A SOURCE OF
FUN FOR MANY, BUT THE COMPANY
RUNNING IT SEE IT AS A VIABLE
BUSINESS ASSET.
>> OF COURSE, WE’RE GOING TO
GET THE HEADLINES, BUT IT
DOESN’T REALLY RUN ON WASTE.
OBVIOUSLY, IT RUNS ON THE
BY-PRODUCT OF WASTE.
AND BIO-METHANE IS NOT A
FOSSIL FUEL.
IT’S INFINITELY RENEWABLE.
ALL THE TIME THERE ARE PEOPLE ON
THE PLANET PRODUCING WASTE, THE
BIO-METHANE WILL BE PRODUCED.
SO IT’S CARBON-NEUTRAL.
>> Reporter: TURNING OUR
DECOMPOSING RUBBISH INTO FUEL
FOR A BUS INVOLVES CLEANING
IT UP, REMOVING VARIOUS
IMPURITIES BEFORE ADDING AN ODOR
TO THE METHANE AND ENSURING IT
REACHES THE EXACTING STANDARDS
REQUIRED FOR THE FUEL TANK.
>> THE EMISSION LEVELS ARE 92%
LESS THAN WHAT YOU WOULD
TYPICALLY EXPECT BEING EMITTED
FROM A DIESEL BUS, AND CARBON
EMISSIONS ARE 20%, 30% LESS THAN
AGAIN WHAT YOU WOULD TYPICALLY
SEE IN A DIESEL BUS.
>> Reporter: THE BIO-BUS CREATES
A VIRTUOUS CIRCLE, ALLOWING
PASSENGERS TO BE TRANSPORTED
HOME USING ENERGY FROM THE WASTE
THEY CREATED AT HOME.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME LATE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
A MISSOURI GRAND JURY HAS
APPARENTLY NOT REACHED A
DECISION ABOUT WHETHER TO CHARGE
POLICE OFFICER DARREN WILSON FOR
THE FATAL SHOOTING OF MICHAEL
BROWN ON AUGUST 9.
THIS ACCORDING TO CNN, NBC AND
LOCAL TELEVISION STATIONS.
THE GRAND JURY REPORTEDLY WILL
RESUME ITS DELIBERATIONS MONDAY.
SECURITY HAS BEEN GREATLY
STEPPED UP IN ANTICIPATION OF
THE GRAND JURY DECISION.
THAT’S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW
NIGHT.